# 2025-08-19: ActivityPub Trust and Safety Task Force Meeting

## Attendees:
- Emelia Smith <@thisismissem@hachyderm.io>
- Evan Prodromou <web+acct:evanprodromou@socialwebfoundation.org>
- amy bones <@amy@spookygirl.boo>

## Agenda:

1. IP Protection Note Reminder:
    - Anyone can participate in these calls. However, all substantive contributors to any Taskforce Work Items must be members of the Social Web CG with full IPR agreements signed. https://www.w3.org/community/socialcg/join
    - To contribute to Work Items: ensure you have a W3 account: https://www.w3.org/accounts/request, and sign the W3C Community Contributor License Agreement (CLA): https://www.w3.org/community/about/agreements/cla/
2. Reminder of [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/swicg/activitypub-trust-and-safety/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)
3. Introductions, if necessary
4. New meeting time - https://github.com/swicg/activitypub-trust-and-safety/issues/91
    - Possible options:
        - 10:00–11:00 Eastern Daylight Time (16:00-17:00 CEST), on Wednesday's every month
        - 11:00–12:00 Eastern Daylight Time (17:00-18:00 CEST), on Wednesday's every month
        - 12:00–13:00 Eastern Daylight Time (18:00-19:00 CEST), on Wednesday's every month

6. Funding / Grants?
~~7. FEP updates~~
    - ~~Labels~~
    - ~~Content Warnings~~
    - ~~Moderation Actor (new?)~~
~~9. Open floor~~

We support contributions to the Agenda, please comment if there is something that we need to address during the meeting.

You can find information on how to join the meeting in the [SWICG calendar](https://www.w3.org/events/meetings/a54ae3c9-89bc-4bb1-b9db-e9494d2100e1/20250121T110000/)

### Previous Action Items

- [x] Evan: add an issue to expand the scope of as:sensitive to Link as well as Object
    - PR is also submitted to make this change. 
- [ ] Darius: talk to w3c about funded task force work in general and report back
- [ ] Evan: review and finish for the report any T&S features in AS2 and AP core
- [x] Emelia / Darius: Decide on a new meeting time & schedule.



## Notes

### New meeting time
- Emelia: A few proposed meeting times, we decided recently to switch to once a month instead of every two weeks, just due to progress cadence being a bit slow. The proposed new meeting time is 10:00–11:00 Eastern Daylight Time (16:00-17:00 CEST), on the first Wednesday of every month. Next meeting 2nd October.
- General consensus was provided both in meeting and in the GitHub issue tracking this change.

### Funding
- Emelia: We have the open question of whether or not a taskforce within the W3C CG structure can receive funding, I believe its members can, given the work on the Forums/Threadiverse taskforce, and the funding would be to individuals.
- Evan: Absolutely, socialcg can't receive funds, but an organisation like IFTAS, A New Social, ASML could coordinate payment of funds. There is the question of who would be providing the grant and if they would want an organisation or individual.
- Emelia: The funder would likely be NLNet, who have already suggested that they'd be interested in funding this work. We can have just myself and Darius apply for the grant and coordinate the payments. We'd still be able to payout to individuals, as long as we have their information to be able to process that with NLNet.
- Emelia: We're looking at applying for deliverables of the FEPs we want to write in the next 3-6 months & Initial Report.
- Evan suggested using the draft reports in the W3C style
- Emelia: Why FEPs? Because that seems like the easier way to publish something and get feedback, which we can then turn into W3C drafts later.
- **Connectivity issues disrupted the meeting, so we closed early**


## Action Items
- [ ] Emelia to coordinate with Dmitri to update the calendar.
- [ ] Evan to follow up on Mailing List / GitHub with ideas on funding.
- [ ] Darius: talk to w3c about funded task force work in general and report back (carried over)
- [ ] Evan: review and finish for the report any T&S features in AS2 and AP core (carried over)
